{{FleetCommander Integration Plugin|version=|ticket=TODO|author=Ab}}

== Overview ==

FleetCommander is a service to centrally manage Desktop environments. It
includes a server to define desktop profiles and a client to apply profile
information to the user's desktop session on a specified machine.

This design document describes an integration of FleetCommander with FreeIPA.
The integration is done two-fold:

* FleetCommander management UI uses FreeIPA to store information about desktop profiles
* FleetCommander management UI allows to associate FreeIPA-provided users, groups, hosts, and host groups with the desktop profiles by creating desktop profile rules

In addition, SSSD is extended to deliver desktop profiles and rules to
the FreeIPA clients where FleetCommander client agent would apply them.

== Use Cases ==
As an administrator, I want to manage desktop profiles in a centralized way

As an administrator, I want to use centrally defined users, groups, hosts and
host groups to specify how desktop profiles should be applied.

As an administrator, I want to make sure desktop profiles associated with a
specific user or user group are downloaded and applied on a specific FreeIPA
client according to the desktop profile rules defined in FreeIPA.

== Design==

=== FleetCommander overview ===
[https://wiki.gnome.org/Projects/FleetCommander FleetCommander] consists on two components:

* a web service integrated with Cockpit that serves the dynamic application and the profile data to the network.
* and a client side daemon that runs on every host of the network.

Fleet Commander relies on libvirt and KVM to generate the profile data
dynamically from a template VM running the same environment as the rest of the
network. Once administrator performs needed modifications in a desktop
environment, FleetCommander picks up all changes made to DConf and other
recognized configured locations and creates a JSON-formatted specification
('desktop profile').

The desktop profile is then stored in a such way that FleetCommander agent can
download it and apply on the client side when user logs in into a graphical
environment.

=== FreeIPA integration ===

We consider using FreeIPA LDAP server to store FleetCommander desktop
profiles. The profiles themselves are small as they represent only changes in
configuration settings against a known desktop environment. FleetCommander
packages the changes into JSON-formatted file. The size of the file is small;
dozen kilobytes at most. The amount of desktop profiles is relatively low, as
well, their change rate is small -- once desktop profile is defined by the
administrators, it is expected that it will be read more often than written
to.

Given that FreeIPA already manages users, groups, hosts, and host groups, we
also consider to store desktop profile rules in the FreeIPA LDAP server. A
desktop profile rule is very similar to SELinux user mapping rules.

While the implementation of FleetCommander's side of the feature is out
of scope of the FreeIPA plugin, we describe full flow to help understanding it.

Since FleetCommander runs as a plugin within Cockpit, it can use Kerberos
credentials of Cockpit (HTTP/cockpit.server) to perform S4U2Self as the
administrator and further use these credentials when talking FreeIPA JSON-RPC
API. In this case Cockpit's host is expected to be enrolled into FreeIPA and
HTTP service is created on the host. In this document from now on HTTP
Kerberos service used by Cockpit is referred as the 'Cockpit service'.

=== High Level Architecture ===

==== Administration ====
# An administrator logs in into Cockpit and navigates to FleetCommander management page.
# A new desktop profile is created. The changes are recorded by FleetCommander into a JSON-formatted file.
# FleetCommander uses Cockpit service credentials to perform S4U2Self as the user logged into Cockpit.
# Using newly obtained ticket, FleetCommander communicates to FreeIPA server via JSON-RPC to manage the desktop profile and rules associated with the profiles.

==== Enforcement of the profiles ====

# SSSD child process downloads desktop profile rules associated with the host from FreeIPA server and stores them in its own database. SSSD would use an LDAP filter ''(&(objectclass=ipadeskprofilerule)(memberHost=my_fqdn_or_my_host_group)(memberUser=user_login_or_group))''  and will ignore HBAC rules for first implementation.
# Based on the profiles referenced in the rules, SSSD child will write profile data into a predefined location ''/var/lib/sss/fleetcmd/username/profilename.json'' where it could be picked up by the FleetCommander agent daemon.
# When user logs on, logind issues a logon signal. The signal is intercepted by the FleetCommander agent daemon.
# The agent daemon merges definitions of desktop profiles which apply to the user and applies them to the desktop environment.

''profilename.json'' file name is built using profile RDN and is prefixed by
the priority of the profile rule using leading zeros. To ease handling of the
files, SSSD may transform RDN value by removing certain characters used by the
shell for globing purposes and by replacing spaces with underscores. Since the
name of the file is only used to ensure ordering of the profiles when merging
them, a lexicographical sort of names should be enough.

Due to the fact that each desktop profile rule references a single desktop
profile and resulting file names are only used for sorting of the profiles,
replacing desktop profile name with a desktop profile rule name in the
generated names does not create any issue.

Example: For a profile rule 'Minimal Desktop For Guests' stored as
''cn=Minimal desktop for guests,cn=rules,cn=desktop-profile,$SUFFIX''
with a priority 100, SSSD would use a file name '000100_Minimal_desktop_for_guests.json'.


=== Access Control ===

From FreeIPA perspective there are three components of the access controls:

# Managing desktop profiles and desktop profile rules
# Reading desktop profile JSON-formatted data
# Reading general information about desktop profiles and desktop profile rules

For managing desktop profiles and desktop profile rules, a set of permissions is added
that can be further delegated via privileges and roles in FreeIPA. This set of
permissions is generated automatically when the plugin is added to FreeIPA by
''ipa-server-upgrade'' as part of managed permissions. The permissions are
granted to the privilege named '''FleetCommander Desktop Profile Administrators'''.

Reading desktop profile JSON-formatted data is limited to those who are
defined in the desktop profile rules governing specific desktop profile. Host
principal used by SSSD is allowed to read the profile data, as well as the
user the profile is applied to. This is cannot be achieved with standard ACI
mechanisms in 389-ds for subjects defined in one object and targets in another
one. Instead, a JSON-formatted data attribute is pulled into the rule with the
CoS plugin configuration and an ACI is added to the desktop profile rule that
limits access to the attribute based on the membership defined in the desktop
profile rule itself.

General information about desktop profiles and desktop profile rules is
readable to authenticated users.

==== Compatibility to older FreeIPA versions ====

The FleetCommander integration feature is designed to be compatible with
FreeIPA 4.4.1+. The feature is delivered as a third-party plugin which
requires special support from the FreeIPA core to allow addition of schema
files. The support for this is planned to be added to FreeIPA 4.4.1+.

== Implementation ==

The FleetCommander integration feature is a third-party plugin for FreeIPA. It
is designed to be installed as a separate package.

The package provides:

* '''schema file''': LDAP schema extension that defines '''ipaDeskprofile''', '''ipaDeskprofileRule''' and '''ipaDeskprofileConfig''' object classes with corresponding attributes. The LDAP attributes and object classes have OIDs in the IANA-registered address space of 1.3.6.1.4.1.31640 which is allocated to the author of this design document.
* '''update file''': LDAP update file to define LDAP sub-tree used to store desktop profiles and desktop profile rules: ''cn=desktop-profile,$SUFFIX'' together with the required access controls (ACIs).
* '''plugin code''': written in Python and split into client and server parts. Client part handles reading of the profile data from the specified file and transforming it to base64 encoding. Server part implements desktop profile and desktop profile rules' management, as well as definition of the default managed permissions.

There are no additional dependencies to what FreeIPA server packages already require.

== Feature Management ==

=== UI ===
TODO: How the feature will be managed via the Web UI.

=== CLI ===
Overview of command line commands.

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! Command
! Arguments and options
! Comments
|-
| deskprofileconfig
| priority
| Global policy on how the profile should be applied
|-
| 
| --priority=Int('ipadeskprofilepriority')
| An integer from 1..24 that defines a policy according to the following table:
|  1 = user, group, host, hostgroup
|  2 = user, group, hostgroup, host
|  3 = user, host, group, hostgroup
|  4 = user, host, hostgroup, group
|  5 = user, hostgroup, group, host
|  6 = user, hostgroup, host, group
|  7 = group, user, host, hostgroup
|  8 = group, user, hostgroup, host
|  9 = group, host, user, hostgroup
| 10 = group, host, hostgroup, user
| 11 = group, hostgroup, user, host
| 12 = group, hostgroup, host, user
| 13 = host, user, group, hostgroup
| 14 = host, user, hostgroup, group
| 15 = host, group, user, hostgroup
| 16 = host, group, hostgroup, user
| 17 = host, hostgroup, user, group
| 18 = host, hostgroup, group, user
| 19 = hostgroup, user, group, host
| 20 = hostgroup, user, host, group
| 21 = hostgroup, group, user, host
| 22 = hostgroup, group, host, user
| 23 = hostgroup, host, user, group
| 24 = hostgroup, host, group, user
|-
| deskprofile_add
| name 
| Profile name 
|-
| 
| --addattr=Str('addattr*')
| Add an attribute/value pair. Format is attr=value. The attribute must be part of the schema.
|-
| 
| --all=Flag('all')
| Retrieve and print all attributes from the server. Affects command output.
|-
| 
| --desc=Str('description?')
| Description
|-
| 
| --data=Bytes('ipadeskdata')
| JSON data for profile
|-
| 
| --raw=Flag('raw')
| Print entries as stored on the server. Only affects output format.
|-
| 
| --setattr=Str('setattr*')
| Set an attribute to a name/value pair. Format is attr=value. For multi-valued attributes, the command replaces the values already present.
|-
| 
| --version=Str('version?')
| Client version. Used to determine if server will accept request.
|-
| deskprofile_del
| name 
| Profile name 
|-
| 
| --continue=Flag('continue')
| Continuous mode: Don't stop on errors.
|-
| 
| --version=Str('version?')
| Client version. Used to determine if server will accept request.
|-
| deskprofile_find
| criteria 
| A string searched in all relevant object attributes 
|-
| 
| --all=Flag('all')
| Retrieve and print all attributes from the server. Affects command output.
|-
| 
| --name=Str('cn?')
| Profile name
|-
| 
| --desc=Str('description?')
| Description
|-
| 
| --data=Bytes('ipadeskdata?')
| JSON data for profile
|-
| 
| --pkey_only=Flag('pkey_only?')
| Results should contain primary key attribute only ("name")
|-
| 
| --raw=Flag('raw')
| Print entries as stored on the server. Only affects output format.
|-
| 
| --sizelimit=Int('sizelimit?')
| Maximum number of entries returned (0 is unlimited)
|-
| 
| --timelimit=Int('timelimit?')
| Time limit of search in seconds (0 is unlimited)
|-
| 
| --version=Str('version?')
| Client version. Used to determine if server will accept request.
|-
| deskprofile_mod
| name 
| Profile name 
|-
| 
| --addattr=Str('addattr*')
| Add an attribute/value pair. Format is attr=value. The attribute must be part of the schema.
|-
| 
| --all=Flag('all')
| Retrieve and print all attributes from the server. Affects command output.
|-
| 
| --delattr=Str('delattr*')
| Delete an attribute/value pair. The option will be evaluated last, after all sets and adds.
|-
| 
| --desc=Str('description?')
| Description
|-
| 
| --data=Bytes('ipadeskdata?')
| JSON data for profile
|-
| 
| --raw=Flag('raw')
| Print entries as stored on the server. Only affects output format.
|-
| 
| --rename=Str('rename?')
| Rename the FleetCommander Desktop Profile object
|-
| 
| --rights=Flag('rights')
| Display the access rights of this entry (requires --all). See ipa man page for details.
|-
| 
| --setattr=Str('setattr*')
| Set an attribute to a name/value pair. Format is attr=value. For multi-valued attributes, the command replaces the values already present.
|-
| 
| --version=Str('version?')
| Client version. Used to determine if server will accept request.
|-
| deskprofile_show
| name 
| Profile name 
|-
| 
| --all=Flag('all')
| Retrieve and print all attributes from the server. Affects command output.
|-
| 
| --raw=Flag('raw')
| Print entries as stored on the server. Only affects output format.
|-
| 
| --rights=Flag('rights')
| Display the access rights of this entry (requires --all). See ipa man page for details.
|-
| 
| --version=Str('version?')
| Client version. Used to determine if server will accept request.
|-
| deskprofilerule_add
| name 
| Rule name 
|-
| 
| --addattr=Str('addattr*')
| Add an attribute/value pair. Format is attr=value. The attribute must be part of the schema.
|-
| 
| --all=Flag('all')
| Retrieve and print all attributes from the server. Affects command output.
|-
| 
| --desc=Str('description?')
| Description
|-
| 
| --hostcat=StrEnum('hostcategory?')
| Host category the rule applies to
|-
| 
| --prio=Int('ipadeskprofilepriority')
| Priority for desktop profile associated with the rule
|-
| 
| --profile=Str('ipadeskprofiletarget')
| Desktop profile associated with the rule
|-
| 
| --ipaenabledflag=Bool('ipaenabledflag?')
| Enabled
|-
| 
| --no_members=Flag('no_members')
| Suppress processing of membership attributes.
|-
| 
| --raw=Flag('raw')
| Print entries as stored on the server. Only affects output format.
|-
| 
| --hbacrule=Str('seealso?')
| HBAC Rule that defines the users, groups and hostgroups
|-
| 
| --setattr=Str('setattr*')
| Set an attribute to a name/value pair. Format is attr=value. For multi-valued attributes, the command replaces the values already present.
|-
| 
| --usercat=StrEnum('usercategory?')
| User category the rule applies to
|-
| 
| --version=Str('version?')
| Client version. Used to determine if server will accept request.
|-
| deskprofilerule_add_host
| name 
| Rule name 
|-
| 
| --all=Flag('all')
| Retrieve and print all attributes from the server. Affects command output.
|-
| 
| --hosts=Str('host*')
| hosts to add
|-
| 
| --hostgroups=Str('hostgroup*')
| host groups to add
|-
| 
| --no_members=Flag('no_members')
| Suppress processing of membership attributes.
|-
| 
| --raw=Flag('raw')
| Print entries as stored on the server. Only affects output format.
|-
| 
| --version=Str('version?')
| Client version. Used to determine if server will accept request.
|-
| deskprofilerule_add_user
| name 
| Rule name 
|-
| 
| --all=Flag('all')
| Retrieve and print all attributes from the server. Affects command output.
|-
| 
| --groups=Str('group*')
| groups to add
|-
| 
| --no_members=Flag('no_members')
| Suppress processing of membership attributes.
|-
| 
| --raw=Flag('raw')
| Print entries as stored on the server. Only affects output format.
|-
| 
| --users=Str('user*')
| users to add
|-
| 
| --version=Str('version?')
| Client version. Used to determine if server will accept request.
|-
| deskprofilerule_del
| name 
| Rule name 
|-
| 
| --continue=Flag('continue')
| Continuous mode: Don't stop on errors.
|-
| 
| --version=Str('version?')
| Client version. Used to determine if server will accept request.
|-
| deskprofilerule_disable
| name 
| Rule name 
|-
| 
| --version=Str('version?')
| Client version. Used to determine if server will accept request.
|-
| deskprofilerule_enable
| name 
| Rule name 
|-
| 
| --version=Str('version?')
| Client version. Used to determine if server will accept request.
|-
| deskprofilerule_find
| criteria 
| A string searched in all relevant object attributes 
|-
| 
| --all=Flag('all')
| Retrieve and print all attributes from the server. Affects command output.
|-
| 
| --name=Str('cn?')
| Rule name
|-
| 
| --desc=Str('description?')
| Description
|-
| 
| --hostcat=StrEnum('hostcategory?')
| Host category the rule applies to
|-
| 
| --prio=Int('ipadeskprofilepriority?')
| Priority for desktop profile associated with the rule
|-
| 
| --profile=Str('ipadeskprofiletarget?')
| Desktop profile associated with the rule
|-
| 
| --ipaenabledflag=Bool('ipaenabledflag?')
| Enabled
|-
| 
| --no_members=Flag('no_members')
| Suppress processing of membership attributes.
|-
| 
| --pkey_only=Flag('pkey_only?')
| Results should contain primary key attribute only ("name")
|-
| 
| --raw=Flag('raw')
| Print entries as stored on the server. Only affects output format.
|-
| 
| --hbacrule=Str('seealso?')
| HBAC Rule that defines the users, groups and hostgroups
|-
| 
| --sizelimit=Int('sizelimit?')
| Maximum number of entries returned (0 is unlimited)
|-
| 
| --timelimit=Int('timelimit?')
| Time limit of search in seconds (0 is unlimited)
|-
| 
| --usercat=StrEnum('usercategory?')
| User category the rule applies to
|-
| 
| --version=Str('version?')
| Client version. Used to determine if server will accept request.
|-
| deskprofilerule_mod
| name 
| Rule name 
|-
| 
| --addattr=Str('addattr*')
| Add an attribute/value pair. Format is attr=value. The attribute must be part of the schema.
|-
| 
| --all=Flag('all')
| Retrieve and print all attributes from the server. Affects command output.
|-
| 
| --delattr=Str('delattr*')
| Delete an attribute/value pair. The option will be evaluated last, after all sets and adds.
|-
| 
| --desc=Str('description?')
| Description
|-
| 
| --hostcat=StrEnum('hostcategory?')
| Host category the rule applies to
|-
| 
| --prio=Int('ipadeskprofilepriority?')
| Priority for desktop profile associated with the rule
|-
| 
| --profile=Str('ipadeskprofiletarget?')
| Desktop profile associated with the rule
|-
| 
| --ipaenabledflag=Bool('ipaenabledflag?')
| Enabled
|-
| 
| --no_members=Flag('no_members')
| Suppress processing of membership attributes.
|-
| 
| --raw=Flag('raw')
| Print entries as stored on the server. Only affects output format.
|-
| 
| --rename=Str('rename?')
| Rename the FleetCommander Desktop Profile Rule Map object
|-
| 
| --rights=Flag('rights')
| Display the access rights of this entry (requires --all). See ipa man page for details.
|-
| 
| --hbacrule=Str('seealso?')
| HBAC Rule that defines the users, groups and hostgroups
|-
| 
| --setattr=Str('setattr*')
| Set an attribute to a name/value pair. Format is attr=value. For multi-valued attributes, the command replaces the values already present.
|-
| 
| --usercat=StrEnum('usercategory?')
| User category the rule applies to
|-
| 
| --version=Str('version?')
| Client version. Used to determine if server will accept request.
|-
| deskprofilerule_remove_host
| name 
| Rule name 
|-
| 
| --all=Flag('all')
| Retrieve and print all attributes from the server. Affects command output.
|-
| 
| --hosts=Str('host*')
| hosts to remove
|-
| 
| --hostgroups=Str('hostgroup*')
| host groups to remove
|-
| 
| --no_members=Flag('no_members')
| Suppress processing of membership attributes.
|-
| 
| --raw=Flag('raw')
| Print entries as stored on the server. Only affects output format.
|-
| 
| --version=Str('version?')
| Client version. Used to determine if server will accept request.
|-
| deskprofilerule_remove_user
| name 
| Rule name 
|-
| 
| --all=Flag('all')
| Retrieve and print all attributes from the server. Affects command output.
|-
| 
| --groups=Str('group*')
| groups to remove
|-
| 
| --no_members=Flag('no_members')
| Suppress processing of membership attributes.
|-
| 
| --raw=Flag('raw')
| Print entries as stored on the server. Only affects output format.
|-
| 
| --users=Str('user*')
| users to remove
|-
| 
| --version=Str('version?')
| Client version. Used to determine if server will accept request.
|-
| deskprofilerule_show
| name 
| Rule name 
|-
| 
| --all=Flag('all')
| Retrieve and print all attributes from the server. Affects command output.
|-
| 
| --no_members=Flag('no_members')
| Suppress processing of membership attributes.
|-
| 
| --raw=Flag('raw')
| Print entries as stored on the server. Only affects output format.
|-
| 
| --rights=Flag('rights')
| Display the access rights of this entry (requires --all). See ipa man page for details.
|-
| 
| --version=Str('version?')
| Client version. Used to determine if server will accept request.
|-
|}

=== Configuration ===

Once the FleetCommander plugin package is installed and ipa-server-upgrade is
ran, no additional configuration is needed to start using API provided by the plugin.
IPA CLI will be available immediately.

For integration with FleetCommander Cockpit management interface, following should be done:

# Cockpit service (HTTP/cockpit.server) should be created for the machine where FleetCommander Cockpit plugin is installed.
# The service principal needs to be marked as allowed to delegate user credentials to with the help of --ok-as-delegate option to service-add or service-mod commands.

== How to Use ==
TODO:
<!--Target audience:  testers, documentation writers, system integrators, solution architects, other developers,... -->
Easy to follow instructions how to use the new feature according to the [[#Use_Cases|use cases]] described above. FreeIPA user needs to be able to follow the steps and demonstrate the new features.

The chapter may be divided in sub-sections per [[#Use_Cases|Use Case]].

== Test Plan ==
TODO:
Test scenarios that will be transformed to test cases for FreeIPA [[V3/Integration_testing|Continuous Integration]] during implementation or review phase. This can be also link to [https://git.fedorahosted.org/cgit/freeipa.git/ source in cgit] with the test, if appropriate.
